

# Spam-Detection Project  
**Session 15 Group 9 – Assignment 2**  

This project detects spam emails using machine learning models. It processes raw email data, trains models, and generates visualizations to help analyze email content and classification results.  

---

## Project Structure

- `data_processing.py` – Cleans raw data, engineers features, scales numerical values, and saves processed data.  
- `model_training.py` – Loads processed data, trains ML models, generates visualizations, and prints evaluation metrics.  
- `data/` – Stores raw and processed datasets.  
- `models/` – Stores trained ML models, scalers, and vectorizers.  
- `visualizations/` – Stores charts, plots, and wordclouds generated by the scripts.  

---

## How to Run

1. **Clone the repository** to your local machine.  
2. **Open a terminal** in the project root directory.  
3. **Install required libraries**:

```bash
pip install pandas numpy scikit-learn matplotlib seaborn nltk streamlit joblib wordcloud


#run
python3 data_processing.py
python3 model_training.py


Enron Spam Dataset

The Enron-Spam dataset is a fantastic ressource collected by V. Metsis, I. Androutsopoulos and G. Paliouras and described in their publication "Spam Filtering with Naive Bayes - Which Naive Bayes?". The dataset contains a total of 17.171 spam and 16.545 non-spam ("ham") e-mail messages (33.716 e-mails total). The original dataset and documentation can be found here.

However, the original datasets is recorded in such a way, that every single mail is in a seperate txt-file, distributed over several directories. This can make reading in the data a bit cumbersome, especially for beginners. Since the data set is such an excellent ressource, I wanted to create a offer a single download of the data through a simple csv-file.

You probably only need the data file ("enron_spam_data.zip"). The python file ("build_data_file.py") contains the script used to construct the csv file (downloading the original raw data from the website, unpacking it, processing it and saving it into a compressed csv file).

Processing of the data is minimal: The dataset contains the following columns:

Column	Explanation
Subject	The subject line of the e-mail
Message	The content of the e-mail. Can contain an empty string if the message had only a subject line and no body. In case of forwarded emails or replies, this also contains the original message with subject line, "from:", "to:", etc.
Spam/Ham	Has the values "spam" or "ham". Whether the message was categorized as a spam message or not.
Date	The date the e-mail arrived. Has a YYYY-MM-DD format.
